Let us take this recursive algorithm
and find its time complexity using recursion
tree and back substitution method. Suppose,
this algorithm takes T(n) time. Checking, this condition
will take only one unit time
This for loop here is from i equal to zero till n
so it will be executed in n+1 times,
n times when it is true and one time when it
finally fails
So this print statement inside the for loop will be
executed n times and the algorithm is called to recursively
with n-1
So if algorithm of n takes T(n) time
algorithm of n-1 will take T(n-1) time
so we can write the recurrence relation
as T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + n + n+1 +1
That is T(n-1) + 2n +2
hear if we take
this recurrence relation it will be very hard to solve
with as it has too many terms
So before solving the recurrence relation we need to simplyfy
it as much as possible.
Here, The term
2n+2 is a linear time function that is
asymptotically equal to O(n) class
So instead of 2n+2 we can just
use n. This one make any difference in the end
result
But it will help us to solve the recurrence relation
easily
So the simplified recurrence relation of this algorithm is
T(n)= T(n-1)+n
Let us write it with the initial condition
T(n)= T(n-1)+n when
n>0
And when n=0 the algorithm will take
only constant time
So T(n)=1  when n=0 and
that's it.
We got the recurrence relations.
Now let us solve it using the recursion tree method
for that first we need to draw the recursion
tree and then we need to mark the time taken
at each level
And finally we can calculate the total time complexity
So first through the recursion tree first write T(n)
what will T(n) do if n>0
It will print n and calls itself with
n-1
The Print statement will take n unit of time
So write n and T(n-1) here
again T(n-1) historic recursive call
So it will also take n-1 unit of
time and call itself with n-2. Again T(n-2)
is recursive car and it will take
n-2 units of time and call itself with
T(n-3)
This recursive tree will grow till it reaches zero
and stop. At T(0)
It won't make any further recursive call as n is
equal to 0
So this is the recursion tree for the given
algorithm .
Now that is marked the total time taken at each
level of tree since the Print statement inside is executed
n times at each level
It takes n unique time that is at first level
It takes n unit time then n-1 then
n-2 then n-3
And similarly it reaches 2 units, 1 unit and zero
units T(0).
Finally let us calculate the total time complexity that is
T(n)= 0 +1 +2 .....
upto n-3 + n-2 + n-1 +n
That is, T(n) equal
to n*(n+1)/2 which
is the sum of n natural numbers. So, T(n)
equal to O(n^2). Next, let us calculate
the time complexity using back substitution method
Here the recurrence relation is T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + n, If
T(n) = T(n-1) + n
what will be T(n-1)  It will
be T(n-2) + n - 1
So in this equation instead of T(n-1)
substitute T(n-2) + n - 1
So we will get T(n) equal to
T(n-2) + n - 1 + n
And now what will be T(n-2)
It will be T(n-3) + n - 2
So instead of T(n-2) substitute
T(n-3) + n - 2
So we will get T(n-3)+n-2+n-1+n
Similarly if we back substitute for K times we will
get T(n) equal to
T(n-k) + (n-(k-1)) +
+ (n-(k-2))
+ ((n-1)) + n
At some point n-k will be
equal to 0 which means K will be equal to
n
So in this equation we can write n instead of
K and we will get T(n-n) +
(n-n+1) + (n-n+2) +
etcetera upto
(n-1) + n
that is T(0) + 1 +2 +3...
etcetera upto (n-1) + n and we
know that T(0) equal to 1 so we
can write one plus some of
first n natural numbers, n*(n+1)/2
So we will get O(n^2)
And that's it. We have got the same time complexity
for this algorithm in both recursion tree and back substitution method